Docs 4361 update permissions articles (#1627)
truenas/documentation: content/SCALE/SCALETutorials/Storage/Pools/PermissionsSCALE.md

An Access Control List (ACL) is a set of account permissions associated with a dataset and applied to directories or files within that dataset.
TrueNAS uses ACLs to manage user interactions with shared datasets and creates them when users add a dataset to a pool.
{{< /hint >}}

## ACL Types in SCALE

TrueNAS SCALE offers two ACL types: POSIX which is the SCALE default, and NFSv4. 
For a more in-depth explanation of ACLs and configurations in TrueNAS SCALE, see our [ACL Primer]({{< relref "ACLPrimer.md" >}}).

For a more in-depth explanation of ACLs and configurations in TrueNAS SCALE, see our [ACL Primer]({{< relref "/content/References/ACLPrimer.md" >}}). 

## Viewing ACL Permissions

> The **Permissions** widget, shown on the **Datasets** screen after selecting a dataset, displays the ACL owner, group and items for that dataset.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The **Permissions** widget, shown on the **Datasets** screen after selecting a dataset, displays the ACL owner, group, and items for that dataset.
```

The ACL items for the NFSv4 ACL listed on the **Permissions** widget are buttons that open configuration options in the **Permissions Widget**.
The ACL items for a POSIX ACL listed on the widget are not buttons and do not open the same permissions options.

![PermissionsWidgetPOSIXACL](/images/SCALE/22.12/PermissionsWidgetPOSIXACL.png "Permissions Widget POSIX ACL")

## Managing Dataset ACLs

You can change ACLs when you add a dataset or want to change it.
You can change dataset-level settings or change each ACL item permissions.
You can change the ACL type from inheriting from the parent dataset to an NFSv4 or a POSIX ACL type.

{{< hint warning >}}
You cannot change the root (pool level) dataset ACL. 

To avoid problems with production datasets, do not change the ACL dataset settings!
{{< /hint >}}

### Adding Dataset ACL Settings

When adding an ACL, you can leave the dataset default settings or you can change dataset level ACL settings.

{{< expand "What type of ACL is created when adding a new dataset?" "v" >}}
The default **ACL Type** setting is determined when the dataset is created. 

> If the dataset **Share Type** setting is set to **SMB** it changes adds an NFSv4 ACL but if set to **Generic** it adds a POSIX ACL. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the dataset **Share Type** is  **SMB**, the default ACL type is NFSv4. If the share type is **Generic** the default ACL type is POSIX. 
```

> The **ACL Type** default setting is **Inherit** which means it inherits the ACL type from the parent dataset. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The **ACL Type** default setting is **Inherit**, which means it inherits the ACL type from the parent dataset. 
```

If you add a dataset as a child of a dataset with an NSFv4 ACL and you do not change the **ACL Type** from **Inherit** to **POSIX**, the dataset inherits the NSFv4 ACL type from the parent dataset even if the **Share Type** is set to **Generic**.

If you add a dataset from the root or a parent dataset with a POSIX ACL, and you change the **ACL Type** setting from **Inherit** to one of the other options, then the **ACL Type** setting and not the parent dataset determines the ACL type added. 

{{< /expand >}}

A warning displays every time you change the **ACL Type** setting.

> If you add child dataset nested under non-root parent with an NFSv4 dataset, and you leave **ACL Type** set to **Inherit**, the system opens the **Set ACL for this dataset** window with the option to return to the **Datasets** screen or to open the ACL manager. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you add a child dataset nested under a non-root parent with an NFSv4 dataset, and you leave **ACL Type** set to **Inherit**, the system opens the **Set ACL for this dataset** window with the option to return to the **Datasets** screen or to open the ACL manager. 
```

Click **Return to Pool List** to return to the **Datasets** screen or click **Go to ACL Manager** to open the **Select a Preset ACL** window and **Edit ACL** screen.

![SelectAPresetACL](/images/SCALE/22.12/SelectAPresetACL.png "Select a preset ACL")

> Select the radio button to either use an existing or create a new preset. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Select the radio button to either use an existing preset or create a new one. 
```

> Because **ACL Type** is set to **Inherit** the child dataset inherits an NSFv4 ACL and the options are all NFSv4 presets.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since **ACL Type** is set to **Inherit**, the child dataset inherits an NSFv4 ACL, and the options are all NFSv4 presets.
```

{{< expand "Click Here for More Information" "v" >}}
From the **Datasets** screen:

To change the ACL settings on a new dataset, click **Add Dataset**, then click **Advanced Options** and scroll down to the **ACL Type** and **ACL Mode** settings. 
To change the ACL settings on an existing dataset, click **Edit** on the **Dataset Details** widget to open the **Edit Dataset** screen.  
Click **Advanced Options**, then scroll down to the **ACL Type** and **ACL Mode** settings. 

![EditDatasetAdvancedACLOptions](/images/SCALE/22.12/EditDatasetAdvancedACLOptions.png "Edit Dataset Advanced Options for ACLs")

You cannot change the **ACL Mode** setting until you select the **ACL Type** from the dropdown list. 
This changes the **ACL Mode** setting to the setting that works for the selected type. 

Changing the **ACL Type** from **Inherit** to any other type displays a warning window with the impact of the change.

![ChangeACLTypeWarnings](/images/SCALE/22.12/ChangeACLTypeWarning.png "Changing ACL Type Warning")

Leave **ACL Type** set to **Inherit** to preserve the ACL type from the parent dataset. For SCALE, which is based on Linux, select either **SMB/NFSv4** or **POSIX** options. 

> NFSv4 is richer than POSIX and is used to losslessly migrate Windows-style ACLs across Active Directory domains (or stand-alone servers). 
> POSIX ACLs are a Linux-specific ZFS feature, used when an organization data backup target does not support native NFSv4 ACLs. 
> Since the Linux platform used POSIX for a long time, many backup products that access the server outside the SMB protocol cannot understand or preserve native NFSv4 ACLs. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
NFSv4 is richer than POSIX and is used to losslessly migrate Windows-style ACLs across Active Directory domains (or stand-alone servers). 
POSIX ACLs are a Linux-specific ZFS feature used when an organization data backup target does not support native NFSv4 ACLs. 
Since the Linux platform used POSIX for a long time, many backup products that access the server outside the SMB protocol cannot understand or preserve native NFSv4 ACLs. 
```

{{< /expand >}}
### Editing ACL Item Permissions

{{< hint ok >}}
You can view permissions for any dataset but the edit option only displays on the **Permissions** widget for non-root datasets.

Configuring advanced permissions overrides basic permissions configured on the **Add Dataset** screen.
{{< /hint >}}
You can edit ACL item permissions when you create your dataset or modify them after you save the dataset.
{{< expand "Click Here for More Information" "v" >}}
From the **Datasets** screen, select the dataset on the tree table to display the dataset widgets for it.

If the **Permissions** widget is an NSFv4 ACL, the ACL items are buttons you can use to open an edit expandable with **Permissions Advanced** and **Flags Advanced** options. 
Select the settings to include or exclude. Click on the next item, owner, or group to open another expandable for that ACL item.

![PermissionsWidgetOwnerNSFv4Options](/images/SCALE/22.12/PermissionsWidgetOwnerNSFv4Options.png "Edit NFSv4 Permissions")

> To change a more permissions such as the owner, group, or to add/remove ACL items, click **Edit** to open the **Edit ACL** screen for NSFv4 ACLs or the **Unix Permissions Editor** for POSIX ACLs. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To change more permissions, such as the owner or group, or to add/remove ACL items, click **Edit** to open the **Edit ACL** screen for NSFv4 ACLs or the **Unix Permissions Editor** for POSIX ACLs. 
```

![EditACLScreen](/images/SCALE/22.12/EditACLScreen.png "Edit ACL NFSv4 Permissions")

The **Edit** button is the only option to change POSIX ACLs. Click to open the **UNIX Permissions Editor** screen. 

![EditACLSetACLPOSIXScreen](/images/SCALE/22.12/EditACLSetACLPOSIXScreen.png "Edit Permissions Unix Permissions Editor")

To change the owner or group, begin typing the user name, then select the user from the dropdown list.

![EditACLSelectOwner](/images/SCALE/22.12/EditACLSelectOwner.png "Edit ACL Select Owner")

Select the group name the same way.

Set the read/write/execute permissions in the **Access Control Entry** area of the screen.

![EditACLScreenEditUser](/images/SCALE/22.12/EditACLScreenEditUser.png "Edit ACL Edit Owner")

> Click **Apply User** under the **Owner** and **Group** fields. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Click **Apply Owner** and **Apply Group** under the **Owner** and **Group** fields. 
```

> To prevent errors, TrueNAS only submits changes when selected.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To prevent errors, TrueNAS only submits changes if you enable **Apply Owner** and **Apply Group**.
```

To modify existing ACL items, first select the item then make your changes to that item.

Select the **Who** value from the dropdown list of users on the system if modifying a **User** permission, or from a list of groups on the system if a **Group** permission, and then select the **Permissions** below the **Who** field. 

See [nfs4_setfacl(1) NFSv4 ACL ENTRIES](https://manpages.debian.org/testing/nfs4-acl-tools/nfs4_setfacl.1.en.html).
Whatever you select in **Who** highlights the **Access Control List** entry on the left side of the screen.

Select **Flags** to specify how this ACL item applies to newly created directories and files within the dataset. 
Basic flags enable or disable ACE inheritance. 
Advanced flags allow further control of how the ACE applies to files and directories in the dataset. 
### Editing POSIX ACL Items

If your dataset uses a POSIX ACL, the **Edit** button on the **Permissions** widget opens the **Unix Permissions Editor** screen.
{{< expand "Click Here for More Information" "v" >}}

![EditPermissionsScreenPOSIXACL](/images/SCALE/22.12/EditPermissionsScreenPOSIXACL.png "POSIX Edit Permissions Screen")

> First select or type the name of the user in **Owner**. The owner controls which TrueNAS user and group has full control of this dataset.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First, select or type the name of the user in **Owner**. The owner controls which TrueNAS user and group has full control of this dataset.
```

> Next select or type the name of the group in **Owner Group**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Next, select or type the name of the group in **Owner Group**.
```

> Select the Read, Write, Execute permissions for each User, Group and Other, then click **Apply User** and **Apply Group**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Select the Read, Write, and Execute permissions for each User, Group, and Other, then click **Apply User** and **Apply Group**.
```

To open the POSIX **Edit ACL** screen, click **Set ACL**.

![EditACLSetACLPOSIXScreen](/images/SCALE/22.12/EditACLSetACLPOSIXScreen.png "POSIX Edit ACL Screen")

Select the ACE (Access Control Entity) on the **Access Control List** then set the **Owner** and **Group**. Click **Apply Owner** and **Apply Group**.
Select the user object from the **Who** dropdown list, and then select the permissions and flags.

If you want to apply this preset to all child datasets select **Apply permissions recursively**.

To add another item to your ACL, click **Add Item**. To display the ACL presets window, click **Use ACL Preset**.

> Click **Save Access Control List** when you finish configuring settings for the user, group or object ACE in the **Who** field.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Click **Save Access Control List** when you finish configuring settings for the user, group, or object ACE in the **Who** field.
```
